---
layout: post
title: clingo-dl
permalink: /labs/clingoDL/
summary: clingo-dl extends clingo with difference logic solving capabilities.
---

The `clingo` derivative `clingo-dl` accepts a subset of the theory of linear constraints 
namely Quantifier-Free Integer Difference Logic (QF-IDL) 
dealing with constraints of the form x-y<=k,
where x and y are integer variables and k is an integer constant.
Despite its restriction, QF-IDL can be used to naturally encode timing related problems, eg scheduling or timetabling,
and provides the additional advantage of being solvable in polynomial time.
Syntactically, a difference constraint x-y<=k is represented by a difference constraint atom of the form `&diff{x-y} <= k`.
`clingo-dl` uses either the `Python` or `C++` theory interface of `clingo` to incorporate a propagator handling QF-IDL constraints. 

# General

The [clingo-dl project](https://github.com/potassco/clingoDL) is managed on github.
Latest release downloads can be found [here](https://github.com/potassco/clingoDL/releases).
[Install instructions]() are provided.

## Options
- All `clingo` options are supported.
- --strict:
    - Enables strict semantics.
- --rdl:
    - Enables real difference logic where a constraint x-y <= k, where x,y are real-valued variables and k is a real constant, have to be encoded as `&diff{x-y} <= "k"`. Note that this is only possible without strict semantics.
- --prop:
    -  Enables difference logic propagation and increases overall propagation strength at the cost of runtime

# Publications

- Tomi Janhunen, Roland Kaminski, Max Ostrowski, Torsten Schaub, Sebastian Schellhorn and Philipp Wanko,
  Clingo goes Linear Constraints over Reals and Integers, TPLP, 2017:
  [[Experiments]({{ site.resourceurl }}/clingo/experiments-clingoLC.tar.xz)]
